.TH METALWHISPER 1 "March 2026" "MetalWhisper 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
metalwhisper \- transcribe audio using Whisper on Apple Silicon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B metalwhisper
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIinput_file\fR [\fIinput_file2\fR ...]
.br
.B metalwhisper
\fB\-\-model\fR \fIalias\fR \fB\-\-download\fR
.br
.B metalwhisper
\fB\-\-list\-models\fR
.br
command | \fBmetalwhisper\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B metalwhisper
transcribes audio files to text using OpenAI Whisper models running natively
on Apple Silicon via the Metal GPU. It supports multiple output formats,
word-level timestamps, voice activity detection, and automatic model
downloading from HuggingFace.
.PP
Audio files in WAV, MP3, M4A, FLAC, CAF, and AIFF formats are supported
via AVFoundation. For other formats, pipe through
.BR ffmpeg (1)
to stdin.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-model\fR \fIpath\fR|\fIalias\fR
Model path, model alias, or HuggingFace repo ID. Required for transcription.
.br
Aliases: tiny, tiny.en, base, base.en, small, small.en, medium, medium.en,
large\-v1, large\-v2, large\-v3, large, turbo, large\-v3\-turbo,
distil\-large\-v2, distil\-large\-v3, distil\-medium.en, distil\-small.en.
.br
If the model is not cached locally, it is downloaded automatically from HuggingFace.
.TP
\fB\-\-language\fR \fIcode\fR
ISO 639\-1 language code (e.g., "en", "ja", "fr"). Default: auto\-detect.
.TP
\fB\-\-task\fR \fItask\fR
Task to perform. Either "transcribe" (default) or "translate" (translates
any language to English).
.TP
\fB\-\-output\-format\fR \fIformat\fR
Output format. One of: text (default), srt, vtt, json.
.TP
\fB\-\-output\-dir\fR \fIdirectory\fR
Write output files to the specified directory. The directory is created if it
does not exist. Output filenames are derived from the input filename with the
appropriate extension.
.TP
\fB\-\-compute\-type\fR \fItype\fR
Compute type for model inference. One of: auto (default), float32, float16,
int8, int8_float16, int8_float32. Short forms f32, f16, int8_f16, int8_f32
are also accepted. Default auto selects float16 on Apple Silicon.
.TP
\fB\-\-beam\-size\fR \fIn\fR
Beam size for beam search at temperature 0. Must be between 1 and 100.
Default: 5.
.TP
\fB\-\-word\-timestamps\fR
Enable word\-level timestamps. Words appear in JSON output and in SRT/VTT
subtitles.
.TP
\fB\-\-vad\-filter\fR
Enable Silero voice activity detection to skip silent regions. Requires
\fB\-\-vad\-model\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-vad\-model\fR \fIpath\fR
Path to the Silero VAD ONNX model file. Required when \fB\-\-vad\-filter\fR
is used.
.TP
\fB\-\-initial\-prompt\fR \fItext\fR
Initial text prompt to guide the decoder. Useful for setting context, spelling
of proper nouns, or style (e.g., punctuation).
.TP
\fB\-\-hotwords\fR \fItext\fR
Hotwords to bias the decoder toward. Useful for domain\-specific terminology.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-condition\-on\-previous\-text\fR
Disable conditioning on previous segment text. By default, the decoder uses
the previous segment's output as context for the next segment. Disabling this
can help when transcription of one segment is poor and would pollute subsequent
segments.
.TP
\fB\-\-temperature\fR \fIt1,t2,...\fR
Comma\-separated list of temperatures for the fallback chain. If decoding at
the first temperature produces output with high compression ratio or low
log probability, the next temperature is tried. Default: 0.0,0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8,1.0.
.TP
\fB\-\-json\fR
Shorthand for \fB\-\-output\-format json\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-verbose\fR
Print progress, timing, and diagnostic information to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-\-list\-models\fR
List all available model aliases and their HuggingFace repo IDs, then list
any locally cached models with their sizes. Exits without transcribing.
.TP
\fB\-\-download\fR
Download the specified model without transcribing. Requires \fB\-\-model\fR.
Prints the local path on success.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Print usage information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print version number and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\fR
Read audio from standard input. The input must be in WAV format. A temporary
file is created and cleaned up on exit (including on SIGINT/SIGTERM).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (invalid arguments, model load failure, transcription failure, etc.).
.SH EXAMPLES
Transcribe a file with the turbo model:
.PP
.RS
.nf
metalwhisper recording.wav \-\-model turbo
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate SRT subtitles with word timestamps:
.PP
.RS
.nf
metalwhisper lecture.mp3 \-\-model turbo \-\-output\-format srt \\
    \-\-word\-timestamps \-\-output\-dir ./subs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Transcribe from a video via ffmpeg:
.PP
.RS
.nf
ffmpeg \-i video.mkv \-ar 16000 \-ac 1 \-f wav \- | \\
    metalwhisper \-\-model turbo \-
.fi
.RE
.PP
Translate French audio to English JSON:
.PP
.RS
.nf
metalwhisper french.mp3 \-\-model large\-v3 \-\-task translate \-\-json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Download a model for later use:
.PP
.RS
.nf
metalwhisper \-\-model large\-v3 \-\-download \-\-verbose
.fi
.RE
.PP
Batch process multiple files:
.PP
.RS
.nf
metalwhisper *.mp3 \-\-model turbo \-\-output\-format srt \-\-output\-dir ./out
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/Library/Caches/MetalWhisper/models/
Default cache directory for downloaded models.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
No environment variables are currently used.
.SH NOTES
MetalWhisper requires macOS 14 (Sonoma) or later on Apple Silicon (M1 or newer).
.PP
Audio formats supported natively: WAV, MP3, M4A, FLAC, CAF, AIFF. For other
formats (MKV, OGG, WMA, etc.), convert or pipe through ffmpeg.
.PP
The \fB\-\-vad\-filter\fR option requires a Silero VAD ONNX model file. This
file is not bundled and must be obtained separately.
.PP
Models use the CTranslate2 format. The same model files are compatible with
Python faster\-whisper.
.SH BUGS
The \fBno_speech_prob\fR field returns 0.0 on the CTranslate2 Metal backend
for the turbo model. No\-speech detection based on this field is effectively
disabled. This does not affect transcription quality.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1)
.PP
Project: https://github.com/Vsevolod\-Oparin/metal\-faster\-whisper
.br
faster\-whisper: https://github.com/SYSTRAN/faster\-whisper
.br
CTranslate2: https://github.com/OpenNMT/CTranslate2
.SH AUTHORS
Vsevolod Oparin.
